https://bugzilla.mozilla.org/show_bug.cgi?id=1524076

# Overview

The user reported that, while using Thunderbird, after pasting into the "to" recipient field an email address already present in their address book entry as an "additional email address", Thunderbird always autocompletes the email to the "primary email address" from said address book entry. This has caused grief with the user constantly sending messages to the wrong email addresss despite starting out with the correct email address, and has caused many lost financial opportunities for the user. Although this can be described as a misuse by the user if the user set up their address book entry such that the primary email address would not be able to reach the intended recipient with the additional email address, it is still unwanted behaviour for the software to autocorrect an email address that was entered correctly in the first place. The risks of fixing this bug involve the potential breaking of the autocomplete search engine, if a thorough study of the behaviour was not done first.

# Diagnosis

After looking through the autocomplete code used by Thunderbird located in `nsAbAutoCompleteSearch.js`, especially the function `startSearch(aSearchString, aSearchParam, aPreviousResult, aListener)`, I was able to get a good sense on how the Autocomplete engine searches and ranks the autocomplete results, and why the correct email adddress was not the number 1 ranked option from AutoComplete.

The `startSearch()` method is the method used by the engine to first gather all possible `searchResults` that matches the query, either from a previous search that uses the same model query, or from the user's address book; the `searchResults` are then sorted in descending order first by their match score, then by their popularity, and then by whether they are the primary email of the address book entry, and lastly alphabetically. Since this bug is to do with pasting an email address directly into the address bar, there is no previous AutoComplete search to deal with, so the application will grab matching results from the user's address book, give them a score using a function called `_getScore()`, and then `searchResults` will sort them per the criteria above.

The function `_getScore()` is where the root of this problem lie: This function takes in an address book entry, the email address to assign a score to, and the search query the user entered, and returns a score. The email address can be matched in a few ways: if the search query matches the nick name of the address book entry, if the search query matches the name associated with the email address, or if part of the email address (not including the domain) matches the search query.

When assigning scores, the `_getScore()` function doesn't actually take into consideration that the search query could be complete email addresses. It first discards the domain name of the email (so as to not try to match the domain name), and then uses indexOf() to try to find the search query inside that string, which would now result in a -1 as the domain name portion is not found. This means that both the primary and the secondary email now has a score of 0 (as confirmed by logging into the console), and the emails are compared by their primary/secondary status in the address card, resulting in the primary email being ranked higher than the secondary email that matched the query completely.

# Proposed Solution

Pasting a complete, or even an almost complete, email address should take the priority and the higher score when matching with autocomplete results, so I placed a check at the beginning of the `_getScore()` function to check whether the search query is equal to the email address that we are currently getting score for. If it is fully matching, a score of `BEST + 1` (the highest score possible) is returned.

# Testing

I set up my address book to have the same type of address book entry with different primary and secondary emails. Before my fix, when I paste in the secondary email, the primary email is suggested by the autocomplete. After applying my fix, when I paste in the secondary email, the entry for the secondary email is correctly suggested.

Unfortunately no tests were found for this module, but further testing will be done with Mozilla's Try server. 

# Links

Pull Request: https://github.com/mozilla/releases-comm-central/pull/25
